WIP: Backbone of a tutorial (#1)
lammps/learning: src/file_format.rst

================================
Introduction to the file formats
================================

LAMMPS internally keeps track of the evolution of atomistic systems. Such a
system is described as a `simulation box` containing an ensemble of particles
interacting with one another according to set of rules, and each with their own
position, velocities etc.

In this section, you will learn how to create a very simple simulation box
using LAMMPS built-in tools.

Running a minimal LAMMPS input
------------------------------

In an empty directory, open a text file and copy the following text inside:

.. code-block:: LAMMPS

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

atom_style atomic
```

My preference is, since we introduce `atom_style` a bit later, we should make this line explicit. Alternatively we could delay discussing `atom_style` at all until (for example) we get to a molecular simulation.

Author: My problem with delaying the discussion about this command would be that the `# atomic` style will be mentioned in the data file we go through later on. I think you are right in making it explicit, as it will make people notice this settings exist. We can mention that a detailed discussion about the several atom types will be given later in the tutorial.

   lattice sc 1.
   region box block 0 5 0 5 0 5
   create_box 1 box
   create_atoms 1 box

   mass 1 1

   write_data data.lmp
   write_dump all atom dump.lammpstrj

Let's save the file with the name `in.lmp`. Now in the command-line you can
run the following command to execute LAMMPS with this input:

.. code-block:: bash

   lmp -i in.lmp

You should see a bunch of lines appear in your screen. The first one should start
with `LAMMPS` followed by a parentheses with the specification of the version
of the code you are using. The last line should read something like
`Total wall time: 00:00:00`. If you've never executed LAMMPS before,
congratulation! This is maybe your first successful (very simple) simulation!

You will also notice that two files appeared in the directory: `data.lmp` and
`dump.lammpstrj`. Let's start by opening the first one.

Data file format
****************

The first file of the two is usually referred to as a `data file`. Its format

> is rather strict and you can see that there are general information at the
> top of the file and several sections starting with a capitalized word, a blank
> line and some numbers. Let's slowly go through all of this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is rather strict, containing:
* a "header" block, which must come first in the file, and
* several "data sections", each of which:
  * starts with a capitalized keyword (such as "Atoms" or "Velocities")
  * followed by a blank line
  * and then a block of numbers (such as each atom's ID, x, y, and z velocities in "Velocities")

Let's slowly go through all of this.
```

The first part of the file is called `the header`. The first line of the file
is always a comment that LAMMPS does not read but which can contain
information on the way the file was generated. Here we see the LAMMPS version
and some more information like timestep and units. The following lines contain
the number of `atoms` (125), the number of `atom types` (1) and three lines
containing `xlo xhi` like indications. This header is simple, but generally,
headers can contain much more information. The first two lines are explicit,

> you define a system with 125 atoms all of which have the same characteristics.
> The last three lines define the volume in which these atoms are contained. It

Reviewer: ```suggestion
you define a system with 125 atoms all of which have the same characteristics.
They all have the same characteristics because your simulation has only one `atom type`;
you will soon learn how to specify different interactions between particles
in LAMMPS by giving the particles different atom types.
The last three lines define the volume in which these atoms are contained. It
```

is a box with edge coordinates starting at 0 and ending at 5 in every direction
(x, y and z).

From here starts the body of the file. The order of the sections is not important
but all of them must come in the format:

.. code-block:: LAMMPS

   Section name # Capitalized, correctly spelled
   # blank line
   Section input # Number of line and format depend on the section.

The first section you should see is the `Masses` section. In LAMMPS, masses are

> assigned to atom types so you only have one line here. All types have their own
> masses but several types can have the same mass. Types are LAMMPS way to refer
> to properties of particles that are *the same* for all particles of *the same
> type*. They are also used to determine how particles interact with one another.
> Types are not always binded to chemical species and you will see in further
> tutorials how it can be convenient to define different types for similar atoms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
usually assigned by atom types. Since you have only one atom type
in this simulation, this `Masses` section has only one line.
```

"usually" added because LAMMPS can have per-atom `rmass` (unlike GROMACS for example). Types are introduced earlier, and detailed information about them can be pushed to when we actually introduce multitype simulations.

The `Atoms` section contains 125 lines, one per atom. The number on each line
are ordered and are for each particle:
* The particle ID which LAMMPS uses to refer to that particle internally
* The type of the particle
* The x, y and z coordinates in absolute distance value
* The xflag, yflag and zflag values, which you can put aside for now

Below you can also see the `Velocities` section which also contains 125 lines.
Each lines gives the particle ID followed by the instantaneous velocities of
the particles along the x, y and z axis in that order. The particle ID refers
to the same ID as in the `Atoms` section.

> The format and meaning of the number in the `Atoms` and `Velocities` sections
> will depend on the `atom_style` the code is told to use. In most recents
> versions of LAMMPS, writing a data file with `write_data` will append a comment
> next to the `Atoms` section name (here `# atomic`). This helps human readers to
> know the meaning of the different number. Some formats can include more
> information like a molecule tag, particles' charges, particles' spins or
> orientation etc. For the velocities, some `atom_style` can require keeping
> track of angular momentum, angular velocities etc. You'll find a detailed
> description of each format in the `read_data section of the manual`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This data file is quite simple because our Very First LAMMPS Script had the
`atom_style` `atomic`, where each particle only has an ID number 
and a three-dimensional position and velocity (and periodic image location).
More detailed simulations will use other `atom_style` commands,
such as `atom_style molecular`, which also tracks molecule ID
numbers and intramolecular arrangements like bonds,
angles, "dihedrals" and "impropers" (which you will learn about later).
You can see that LAMMPS includes a comment `# atomic` next to the
`Atoms` section name (here `# atomic`), and you can find a detailed
description of each format in the `read_data section of the manual`_.
```

We regularly instruct our forum readers to use the latest LAMMPS version and we should assume they are doing the same when reading this manual (especially if they are using LAMMPS GUI).

Author: This is a very good remark. I will also add it in the introduction of the tutorial where I also tell readers to get in touch with their IT support to get LAMMPS installed. I think it might be necessary to mention the latest release is preferable.

> 
> As a first takeaway, remember that `data files` contain detailed information
> on a simulation system at a given time. They are more convenient for input and
> output. Several simulation softwares allow you to export files as LAMMPS
> `data files` and take them as input. But data format are not straightforward to
> use for analyses: they are heavy and may contain useless information. This is
> what the dump file format is for.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

You may have noticed our first LAMMPS script also produced a `dump file`.
We will now read through this dump file, and then learn how it is
different from a data file and how to use each file type.
```

Dump file format
****************

Following the previous sections, open the `dump.lammpstrj` file that should
have appeared in your directory. This is a `dump file` containing a single
`snapshot` You should see something like this:

.. code-block:: LAMMPS

  ITEM: TIMESTEP
  0
  ITEM: NUMBER OF ATOMS
  125
  ITEM: BOX BOUNDS pp pp pp
  0.0000000000000000e+00 5.0000000000000000e+00
  0.0000000000000000e+00 5.0000000000000000e+00
  0.0000000000000000e+00 5.0000000000000000e+00
  ITEM: ATOMS id type xs ys zs
  1 1 0 0 0
  2 1 0.2 0 0
  3 1 0.4 0 0
  4 1 0.6 0 0
  5 1 0.8 0 0
  ...

> The format is more simple compared to the data file. Each section is labeled

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The dump file format is simpler than the data file. Each section is labeled
```

with a header directly followed by the data we wanted to dump. Here we used the
basic atom dump_style so we only have atoms' id, types and scaled coordinates
(that is coordinates divided by box length in each dimension).

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

From the TIMESTEP heading, you might guess that a dump file will
usually contain information about how a simulation changes `over time`,
and you would be correct! Thus, a `data` file is used to store the `complete`
state of a simulation with the `write_data` command, and in later lessons
you will see how to start a new simulation from that state with the
`read_data` command. On the other hand, a `dump` file stores information
about how the system changes over time, and can then be used for analyzing
simulation results.

If you (or your supervisor) have previously used other molecular dynamics
software, you may recognize that the dump file loosely corresponds to "coordinates"
or "trajectory" output files from other software. However, LAMMPS gives you
great flexibility in what you choose to output. For example, the default `dump` format
outputs scaled coordinates, but we will soon see how to output unscaled
coordinates instead. You may know that other molecular dynamics packages
store information that `does not` change throughout a simulation (such as
molecular bonds and particle charges) in "parameter", "topology" or
"configuration" files. In LAMMPS, this information is read from a `data` file, but
the `data` file also usually contains coordinates and velocities.
```

Author: Great addition.

> You can compare the `dump file` with the `data file`, and
> see that they basically contain the same information, with few
> exceptions, namely the total number of types, masses and the velocities. Getting only the
> scaled coordinates of the atoms is not alway ideal, but fortunately we can get
> much more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> In your `in.lmp` file, replace the `write_dump` line with the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As an example of customizing the dump file, 
in your `in.lmp` file, replace the `write_dump` line with the following:
```
